---
title: 'This is a Blog Post About Physics'
date: 2019-04-01
permalink: /posts/2019/04/this-is-a-blog-post-about-physics/
tags:
  - Physics
  - Philosophy
---
  
<p>This is a blog about physics.</p>
 
<p>And it’s about physics because physics is beautiful and exciting. But it’s also about how we learn and know things. Because how we know what we know is also beautiful and exciting.</p> 

<p>Take, for instance, one of the most famous and mysterious equations in all of physics:</p>

G<sub>&mu;&nu;</sub> + g<sub>&mu;&nu;</sub> &Lambda; = T<sub>&mu;&nu;</sub>

<p>This is an elegantly simple (tensorial) way of writing the Einstein field equations. Represented in this way are 16 equations which, if one is clever, can be further reduced to 6 independent equations with 4 degrees of freedom. Which should seem pretty intuitive - we (apparently) live in a spacetime with three spatial dimensions (“degrees of freedom”) and a temporal one. Set the right side equal to zero and, if one is further clever, one quickly finds that something analogous to light exists - gravitational waves. For all else that this equation might mean, it straightforwardly tells us something beautiful and deep on its face. Pretty cool!</p>

<p>But this equation wasn’t handed down from above, it wasn’t found chiseled on a rock, or scribbled on an ancient scroll. How did we learn that this particular combination of symbols meant something important?</p> 

<p>I recently ran across a nice lecture by John Norton, a historian of physics, on how Einstein arrived at this equation by combining the best aspects of two separate ways of doing physics. Norton calls these the “physical” and “formal” approaches. But since the first refers to concepts that are evidentially supported and the other refers to the mathematical structure of the theory, we might also refer to them as the empirical and mathematical approaches. In the first case, we ask that our physical theories obey (often generalized) principles that we have deduced from observation. For example, according to this approach we must be able to show some statement like classical energy conservation holds for the Einstein equations in the appropriate limit. What of the formal or mathematical approach? In this case, we write down a statement like a transformation rule that we want our theory to obey. We then work out what the consequences of that rule are for the structure of the theory.</p> 

<p>While we might engage in each approach separately, we generally also demand that our physical theories to be consistent within themselves. So we need to make these approaches work together. Which is what Einstein did. He wrote down a generalized form of energy conservation, demanded that this form obey a certain transformation rule, and was (with some difficulty) able to show that the Einstein equation held.</p> 

<p>Among the many things that we should take away from this is that even the most abstract musings of theorists aren’t really done only on a chalkboard, they’re done by writing down different ways of summarizing what one observes in the world around them. There are of course many possible summaries, and so we need rules to tell us which summaries are likely to be useful and which ones to discard. That is, we need some intuition about the things we’re studying. That intuition comes from experiments, both real ones done in laboratories or with telescopes and ones done in “thought”.</p> 

<p>For many who don’t get to do physics on a daily basis, modern concepts in relativity and quantum mechanics seem wholly disconnected from reality. It’s a shame that this is so. Nothing could be further from the truth - although physical systems do not behave according to the demands of our everyday experience, they are understandable with a bit of careful study and care. But doing so requires us to think in both physical (empirical) and formal (mathematical) ways. To set aside common sense in favor of a commitment to a different kind of intuition.</p> 

<p>That’s really hard.</p> 

<p>We’re going to make mistakes, and we might run away from the challenge thinking we’re not smart enough or afraid of what we might find. But trying to do exactly that is what this blog is about. It’s about speaking openly about the intuitive basis of what we know about the world around us, so that the things which hold no real mystery can be spoken about clearly, and those things that are mysterious can be appreciated fully.</p>
