---
title: 'The GRE Measures Race and Gender not Potential for Academic Success in Physics and Astronomy'
date: 2021-01-02
permalink: /posts/2012/08/the-physics-gre/
tags:
  - admissions
  - equity
  - GRE
---

<p>The national completion rate for PhD students is about 40%. Despite the vast effort of resources and human effort that students spend on applying to graduate school and that admissions committees spend on reviewing applications; we do no better than a coin flip in assessing completion potential. It is hard to imagine we do better in predicting research success or innovation.</p>

<p>Applications to PhD programs in physics and astronomy typically consist of undergraduate transcripts, personal or research statements, letters of recommendation and GRE general and subject test results. Empirical studies have shown that GRE scores and undergraduate grades best predict admission to competitive PhD programs.</p>

<p>A commonly cited meta-analysis in defense of the GRE as an admissions tool has shown only weak correlations between scores on the GRE and first year GPA. By contrast, studies of the general and physics subject test have shown no or very weak correlations with discipline specific graduate school grades, completion, and research success. These results remain true even adjusting for finite range and other selection effects.</p>

<p>By contrast, research has shown strong correlations between the physics GRE and race and gender. Claims that the predictive power of the GRE is independent of race or gender reflect, for example, similar slopes in the cumulative distribution function, rather than the absolute score scale which is available to committees and used in admissions. Typical cutoffs on GRE scores, for example, require white male applicants to be within 1 standard deviation of the mean score. By contrast, an African American female applicant will need to be 3-5 standard deviations from the mean score for her demographic in order to be admitted.</p>

<p>The physics GRE implicitly encodes racial and ethnic biases into the PhD admissions process in physics and astronomy. This sort of bias is implicit because it encodes social and cultural capital into the absolute scoring of the exam, not into the correlation (or slope and r-value) of the relationship between first year GPA and GRE scores. This latter correlation also yields little useful information given that the intended outcome of PhD admissions is to produce high quality scientists, not to succeed in first year coursework.</p>

<p>Given the vast amount of time and resources spent on the physics and general GRE tests by both committees and applicants, the bias of the GRE as a tool for assessing past academic performance or future potential, and the failure of graduate admissions to reliably predict PhD completion, it is time to develop and implement tools and methods that will produce more diverse and successful cohorts.</p>
