---
title: 'The Future of Education in Physics and Cosmology'
date: 2020-03-20
permalink: /posts/2020/03/cosmology-education/
tags:
  - cosmology
  - education
  - teaching
---

<p> This post is an minimally modified version of an essay that was submitted as part of a certification in higher education pedagogy. I have reproduced it here with the hope that it might inform discussions around curriculum reform and classroom techniques. Please contact me for a full list of the cited references.</p>

<p> Contemporary physics education research has its start in the disturbing recognition that physics students “do not learn what they are told” (Robertson et al., 2013 and references therein). Conceptual retention has been estimated at 30% and in interview-based studies, students typically make recourse to fundamentally Aristotelian explanations, even after completing introductory coursework in Newtonian physics. In hindsight, this should not have been unexpected. Physics is regarded in the popular imagination as the archetype of the fact-based science and approaches to education in the subject have followed traditional (and ineffective) methods of lecturing, practice and assessment. Perhaps surprisingly, however, the community response to these issues has been a rapid uptake in research based and student-centered approaches to teaching (Webb, 2017). Although progress is not complete, and there are significant discipline specific concerns about adapting these methods to advanced as opposed to introductory coursework, less progress has been made in a critical assessment of the larger structure of the university physics curriculum as it serves the diverse needs of 1) physics graduates and undergraduates 2) non-physics STEM students and 3) a general education audience. Cosmology education is understudied, with only a handful of attempts at systematic study (Kragh, 2011a, 2014) despite its importance to curriculum reform efforts (e.g. Kwok 2018).</p>

<p> A general approach to physics education is challenged by the diversity of underlying motivations for enrollment in physics courses. Students generally come from three distinct populations, 1) physics students 2) those who require physics as part of a dedicated program of study in another field and 3) general education students. Those in the second group are further subdivided into non-physics STEM students and life sciences students, typically on a “pre-med” track. Reflecting this, physics education research has two dominant paradigms, Recurrence-oriented and Case-Oriented (Robertson et al. 2013). In the recurrence-oriented paradigm, emphasis is placed on the principles that, even if complex, human behavior is predictable, and that real phenomenon are reproducible. Emphasis in much of this research therefore centers on identifying patterns of misconceptions and measuring learning gains as a function of many variables. Although not incompatible with recurrence-oriented work, case-oriented research aims at observing local interactions with the recognition that reality is subjectively constructed and that individual responses are a function of meanings and interpretations brought at an individual level. This
approach calls into question the ability of misconception oriented educational approaches to achieve the educational aims relevant to each group.

<p>Clearly identifying those goals has proven problematic, however, general themes exist and have motivated both traditional methods of instruction and efforts at reform. In introducing curriculum reforms at Hong Kong University, Kwok (2018) remarks that “universities are not diploma mills; students should attend not just to get a degree, but to learn how to evolve their own intellect” and that “students should acquire the ability to solve problems by studying examples of previous work. In the process, they should develop free, bold, independent, and creative thinking”. The latter is in line with both the most common accounts of the value and methods of a physics education. Although approached differently in traditional and student centered classrooms, Problem Based Learning (PBL) is based on the idea that well posed problems are a vehicle for developing problem solving skills, and that instructors should assist students while they complete these tasks (Ravankar, et al. 2018). In introductory classrooms, students approach problems of this sort by 1) identifying the correct formula, 2) identifying and plugging in data to the formula and 3) completing a series of mathematical operations to arrive at a numerical answer. Although problems increase in complexity in advanced undergraduate and even graduate classrooms, learning and assessment typically replicate and follow this formula. But does this approach satisfy the goals of a physics education that seeks to develop independence, boldness and creativity?</p>

<p>In developing a new approach to curriculum design, Ravankar et al. respond by introducing the notion of Problem Finding Based Learning (PFB). In PFB, students are presented with ill-posed or “wicked problems” that lack sufficient information to solve, are known to lack a solution, or whose solutions require the careful selection and solving of many ancillary problems. This address the core problems of connecting theoretical knowledge, what is typically taught in university classrooms, to practical application. Students are explicitly required to consider and accept or reject multiple possible solutions in the presence of ambiguity. Instructors, rather than acting as “guardians of knowledge”, provide guidance as to promising or less promising paths, and suggest new approaches. Students are required to “take the lead” and “assert control” over their education. Successful implementation of PFB techniques has typically been done as part of significant curriculum redesign efforts at the graduate level.</p>

<p>Can these techniques be adopted to the undergraduate level for diverse and general education audiences? Webb (2017) introduces the notion of “concepts-first + active learning” in large introductory physics courses at UC Davis. Motivated by the idea that the distinguishing feature of expert level reasoning is that ideas are organizing according to specific principles, he attempts to provide these specific principles to introductory learners through conceptual education and testing, prior to the introduction of technical and mathematical skills. Although a small sample size, small improvements in assessment scores and STEM retention rates are found, and students from underrepresented backgrounds are found to especially benefit from this specific instructional change. In a general education context, Parthasarathy (2015) has developed a general education course in biophysics, introducing advanced topics like scaling laws, Brownian motion, and protein folding to non-science majors along similar principles. That work also finds significant benefits and reduction in anxiety around data analysis and mathematics for this population.</p>

<p>This post has so far centered on recent developments and paths forward in physics education but has not so far discussed how these ideas may translate to cosmology courses. The reason for this is simple, cosmology is a new and narrow scientific discipline that is not explicitly part of the core curriculum in physics. The discipline, however, forms the foundation of most large introductory GE astronomy courses, that typically begin with the origin of the universe and end with a discussion of the evolution of life on Earth. Kwok’s (2018) curriculum redesign and reorganization of the University of Hong Kong placed what might broadly be thought of as cosmology courses at the core of the university’s curriculum for both science and non-science students. Beyond the subject’s core role, the discipline poses significant interdisciplinary challenges given its central importance to both technical and philosophical-religious issues. To this point, research has focused on identifying student misconceptions about the discipline (Kragh, 2014) and not to comprehensive methods for interdisciplinary education in the subject. In order to partially address this, making use of the techniques discussed in this essay, this issue is explored further explored in the annotated syllabi for astrophysics and cosmology courses at both the general education and advanced undergraduate level that are included in this portfolio.</p>
